---
sort: 2
---

## Methods Common to All Objects

### Item10: Obey the general contract when overriding `equals`

It can be hard to define the concept of *equal*, and here are some general contracts:

1. Reflexive: `x.equals(x) == true`
2. Symmetric: `x.equals(y)==true && y.equals(x)==true`
3. Transitive: `x.equals(y)==true && y.equals(z)==true && x.equals(z)==true`
4. Consistent: `x.equals(y)==true && x.equals(y)==true`
5. `x.equals(null) == false`

For Item1, it would promise itself automatically. But for Item2, things can be tricky: Say we got a class that contains a value field String, and then we would compare it with another String instance. If this comparison returns true, it would break the rule when we compare the String instance with this class instance. So when we write the `equals` function, we must be careful.

For Item3, it could be broken when we compare superclass instances and subclass instances together. Say, we got an instance A, B, C, among which B is the superclass of A and C. In this case, if `A.equals(B) == true && B.equals(C)`, we may not get the result `A.equals(C)`, because we may ommit some fields when we compare superclass instances and subclass instances, but when we comapre subclass instances separately, we would compare all the value fields, and in this way the value fields ommited in the former comparsion might cause conflicts. We may never preserve the contract while extending an instantiable class and adding a value component. Or we can break the relationship between the superclass and subclass and place the superclass in a field of the subclass.

```java
public class ColorPoint {
  private final Point point;
  private final Color color;
  
  public Point asPoint() {
    return point;
  }
  
  @Override
  public boolean equals(Object o) {
    if(!(o instanceof ColorPoint)) {
      return false;
    }
    ColorPoint cp = (ColorPoint) o;
    return cp.point.equals(point) && cp.color.equals(color);
  }
}
```

For Item4, it would be safe at the most time, but if the code reles on some unreliable resources, like network, it would be violated.

As for Item5, *instanceof* would take care of it, so that we do not need to write other codes to check null value.

Some rules we should follow:

1. Use `==` to check if the argument is a reference to this object
2. Use the `instanceof` to check if the argument type
3. Cast the argument to the coreect type
4. Check all the significant fields in the class

### Item11: Override *hashCode* when overriding *equals*

It mainly helps to make the behaviors of the object correct in `HashMap` and `HashSet`. Here are some rules:

- `hashCode` must always return the same result when invoked in the same object.
- `hashCode` must return the same values when two objects are equal by `equals`
- `hashCode` is not requeired to return distinct values when invoked in two or more different objects

So here is a recommended way to compute hash code for an object:

Compute the hash code for significant fields in the object one by one:

1. Compute

   - Primitive field: `Type.hashCode(f)` with boxed primitive class `Type`
   - Object reference: compute hash code **recursively** in the object, or we can cache the result
   - Array: Compute a hash code for each significant element recursively, or a constant for none-significant-element array

2. Combine the hash code c computed above into original result:

   result = 31 * result + c

In fact, we should use something like AutoValue framework, instead of writing it by ourselves

### Item12: Override *toString*

By doint this, we can make our log much clearer, and make the object human-readable. Also, framework should help with this, but it could be more frequent that programmers write by themselves, at least we are doing this now.

### Item13: Override *clone* jusiciouly

We should only invoke `clone` on object which implements `Cloneable` interface, or we would get an Exception only, though there is no methods declared in this interface.

Here is some specification:

- `x.clone() != x`
- `x.clone().getClass() == x.getClass()`
- `x.clone().equals(x)`

Note: **immutable** classes should never provide a `clone` method.

Also we must be cautious when copying object reference, and we must avoid referring to the same object directly and simply. `clone` it recursively. And the `Cloneable` is not compatiable with `final` fields, unless the mutable class referrd to can be safely shared. In fact, we should remove any `final` modifiers to make a class cloneable.

Sometimes it is not even enough to call `clone` recursively, we need to use deep copy, like handling with the bucket of HashTable.

A better way to clone is to peovide a *copy constructor* or *copy factory*.

```java
// Copy constructor
public Yum(Yum yum) { ... }

// Copy factory
public static Yum newInstance(Yum yum) { ... }
```

These two methods have many advantages, like properly dealing with final fields, no uncessary checked exception, as well as dealing with interfaces implemented by the class.

### Item14: Consider implementing *Comparable*

`compareTo` method is not declared in `Object`, but in the `Comparable` interface. Sorting an array of objects that implement `Comparable` is simple:

```java
Arrays.sort(a);
```

And the interface looks like this:

```java
public interface Comparable<T> {
  int compareTo(T t);
}
```

There rules:

1. if a > b, then b < a; if a = b, then b = a; if a < b, then b > a
2. if a > b && b > c, then a > c
3. if a == b && a > c, then b > c

Note that sometimes `compareTo` and `equals` could be inconsistent, so that it may bring some problems in `Collection`, `Set` and `Map`. Like in `HashSet`, `BigDevimal("1.0")` and `BigDecimal("1.00")` are two different elements, while in `TreeSet`, the two are recognized as the same emelment.

Not like `equals` method, it is unnecessary to type check or cast arguments in `compareTo` method. Because the method is statically typed.

Also, we need to invoke `compareTo` recursively in object reference field. And fields are compared in order. If customeried order is needed or not wiling to implement `Comparable`, then the `Comparator` is needed.

```java
// Comparable with comparator construction methods
private static final Comparator<PhoneNumber> COMPARATOR = 
  comparingInt((PhoneNumber pn) - > pn.areaCode)
  .thenComparingInt(pn -> pn.prefix)
  .thenComparingInt(pn -> pn.lineNum);

public int compareTo(PhoneNumber pn) {
  return COMPARATOR.compare(this, pn);
}
```

We should use the static `compare` methods in boxed primitive classes, and operators < and > should be avoided.