---
sort: 6
---



## Lambdas and Streams

### Item42: Prefer lambdas to anonymous classes

The most common usage of anonymous class:

```java
Collections.sort(words, new Comparator<String>() {
  public int compare(String s1, String s2) {
  	return Integer.compare(s1.length(), s2.length());
  }
});
```

Now it can be replaced by the lambda expression:

```java
Collections.sort(words, (s1, s2) -> Integer.compare(s1.length(), s2.length()));
```

Note that the types of the lambda (`Comparator`), of its parameters (s1 and s2, both `String`), and of its return value (`int`) are not present in the code. The compiler deduces these types from context, using a process known as *type inference*. So the rule is: Omit the types of all lambda parameters unless their presence makes your program clearer.

Or, the comparator code can be even shorter:

```java
Collections.sort(words, comparingInt(String::length));
```

This is called *comparator construction method*. And given that the sort method has been added to `List` since Java 8, the code can be rewritten like this:

```java
words.sort(comparingInt(String::length));
```

Lambdas can be used in any place where accepts functional interfaces. But lambdas lack names and documentation; if a computation isn’t self-explanatory, or exceeds a few lines, don’t put it in a lambda. Also, lambdas are limited to functional interfaces, and if we want an instance of abstract class, the anonymous class is the choice. Anonymous classes can also create instances of interfaces with multiple abstract methods. Finally, a lambda cannot obtain a reference to itself.

In the end, we should not serialize lambdas, and we should use an instance of a private static nested class instead.

### Item43: Prefer method references to lambdas

Lambdas are more succinct than anonymous classes, while method references are even more succinct than lambdas.

The function of the code snippet is to associate the number 1 with the key if it is not in the map and to increment the associated value if the key is already present:

```java
map.merge(key, 1, (count, incr) -> count + incr);  // this method was added in Java 8
```

Rewrite:

```java
map.merge(key, 1, Integer::sum);
```

Also, it would be helpful when a lambda is too long or complex: extract the code from the lambda into a new method and replace the lambda with a reference to that method.

Many method references refer to static methods, but there are four kinds that do not.

- *bound* instance method reference: the receiving object is specified in the method reference.
- *unbound* instance method reference: the receiving object is specified when the function object is applied, via an additional parameter before the method’s declared parameters.
- *constructor* reference - for class and array: serve as factory objects.

| Method Ref Type   | Example                | Lambda Equivalent                                  |
| ----------------- | ---------------------- | -------------------------------------------------- |
| Static            | Integer::parseInt      | str -> Integer.parseInt(str)                       |
| Bound             | Instant.now()::isAfter | Instant then = Instant.now(); t -> then.isAfter(t) |
| Unbound           | String::toLowerCase    | str -> str.toLowerCase()                           |
| Class Constructor | TreeMap::new           | () -> new TreeMap                                  |
| Array Constructor | int[]::new             | len -> new int[len]                                |

The simplest rule: Where method references are shorter and clearer, use them; where they aren’t, stick with lambdas.

### Item44: Favor the use of standard functional interfaces

After Java has lambdas, classes could provide a static factory or constructor that accepts a function object to achieve the same effect. The` java.util.function` package provides a large collection of standard functional interfaces for use. If one of the standard functional interfaces does the job, we should generally use it in preference to a purpose-built functional interface.

There are forty-three interfaces in` java.util.Function`. The basic interfaces operate on object reference types.

- The `Operator` interfaces represent functions whose result and argument types are the same.
- The `Predicate` interface represents a function that takes an argument and returns a `boolean`.
- The `Function` interface represents a function whose argument and return types differ.
- The `Supplier` interface represents a function that takes no arguments and returns (or “supplies”) a value.
- The `consumer` represents a function that takes an argument and returns nothing, essentially consuming its argument. 

| Interface           | Function Signature  | Example             |
| ------------------- | ------------------- | ------------------- |
| UnaryOperator\<T\>  | T apply(T t)        | String::toLowerCase |
| BinaryOperator\<T\> | T apply(T t1, T t2) | BigInteger::add     |
| Predicate\<T\>      | boolean test(T t)   | Collection::isEmpty |
| Function<T, R>      | R apply(T t)        | Arrays::asList      |
| Supplier\<T\>       | T get()             | Instant::now        |
| Consumer\<T\>       | void accept(T t)    | System.out::println |

There are also three variants of each of the six basic interfaces to operate on the primitive types `int`, `long`, and `double`. Their names are derived from the basic interfaces by prefixing them with a primitive type.

There are nine additional variants of the Function interface, for use when the result type is primitive. If both the source and result types are primitive, prefix `Function` with *SrcToResult*. If the source is a primitive and the result is an object reference, prefix `Function` with `<Src>ToObj`.

There are two-argument versions of the three basic functional interfaces for which it makes sense to have them: `BiPredicate<T, U>`, `BiFunction<T, U>`, and `BiConsumer<T, U>`.

Finally, there is the `BooleanSupplier` interface, a variant of `Supplier` that returns `boolean` values.

Most of the standard functional interfaces exist only to provide support for primitive types. Don’t be tempted to use basic functional interfaces with boxed primitives instead of primitive functional interfaces. And we should always annotate our functional interfaces with the @FunctionalInterface annotation.

Do not provide a method with multiple overloadings that take different functional interfaces in the same argument position if it could create a possible ambiguity in the client.

### Item45: Use streams judiciously

A stream pipeline consists of a source stream followed by zero or more *intermediate operations* and one *terminal operation*. Each intermediate operation transforms the stream in some way, and the terminal operation performs a final computation on the stream resulting from the last intermediate operation.

Stream pipelines are evaluated *lazily*: evaluation doesn’t start until the terminal operation is invoked, and data elements that aren’t required in order to complete the terminal operation are never computed.

```java
public class Anagrams {
  public static void main(String[] args) throws IOException {
    File dictionary = new File(args[0]);
    int minGroupSize = Integer.parseInt(args[1]);
    Map<String, Set<String>> groups = new HashMap<>();
    try (Scanner s = new Scanner(dictionary)) {
      while (s.hasNext()) {
        String word = s.next();
        groups.computeIfAbsent(alphabetize(word), (unused) -> new TreeSet<>()).add(word);
      }
    }
    for (Set<String> group : groups.values())
      if (group.size() >= minGroupSize)
      	System.out.println(group.size() + ": " + group);
  }
  private static String alphabetize(String s) {
    char[] a = s.toCharArray();
    Arrays.sort(a);
    return new String(a);
  }
}
```

Keep in mind: Overusing streams makes programs hard to read and maintain. And in the absence of explicit types, careful naming of lambda parameters is essential to the readability of stream pipelines. Also, we should refrain from using streams to process char values.

Basic rule: refactor existing code to use streams and use them in new code only where it makes sense to do so.

There are some things you can do from code blocks that you can’t do from function objects:

- From a code block, you can read or modify any local variable in scope; from a lambda, you can only read final or effectively final variables, and you can’t modify any local variables.
- From a code block, you can `return` from the enclosing method, `break` or `continue` an enclosing loop, or throw any checked exception that this method is declared to throw; from a lambda you can do none of these things.

One thing that is hard to do with streams is to access corresponding elements from multiple stages of a pipeline simultaneously: once you map a value to some other value, the original value is lost.

In the end, if you’re not sure whether a task is better served by streams or iteration, try both and see which works better.

### Item46: Prefer side-effect-free functions in streams

Streams isn’t just an API, it’s a paradigm based on functional programming.

The most important part of the streams paradigm is to structure your computation as a sequence of transformations where the result of each stage is as close as possible to a *pure function* of the result of the previous stage, which only depends on the input, instead of any mutable stat.  In order to obtain the expressiveness, speed, and in some cases parallelizability that streams have to offer, you have to adopt the paradigm as well as the API.

Note: A `forEach` operation that does anything more than present the result of the computation performed by a stream is a “bad smell in code,” as is a lambda that mutates state. The `forEach` operation should be used only to report the result of a stream computation, not to perform the computation.

The collectors for gathering the elements of a stream into a true Collection are straightforward. There are three such collectors: `toList()`, `toSet()`, and `toCollection(collectionFactory)`.

```java
List<String> topTen = freq.keySet().stream()
  .sorted(comparing(freq::get).reversed())
 	.limit(10)
 	.collect(toList());
```

It is customary and wise to statically import all members of `Collectors` because it makes stream pipelines more readable. 

In addition to the `toMap` method, the `Collectors` API provides the `groupingBy` method, which returns collectors to produce maps that group elements into categories based on a *classifier function*.

```java
words.collect(groupingBy(word -> alphabetize(word)))
```

### Item47: Prefer Collection to Stream as a return type

`Stream` failed to extend `Iterable`, so it does not make iteration obsolete. The `Collection` interface is a subtype of `Iterable` and has a `stream` method, so it provides for both iteration and stream access. `Collection` or an appropriate subtype is generally the best return type for a public, sequencereturning method. But do not store a large sequence in memory just to return it as a collection.

The disadvantage of using `Collection` as a return type rather than `Stream` or `Iterable`: `Collection` has an int-returning `size` method, which limits the length of the returned sequence to `Integer.MAX_VALUE`, or 2^31 − 1.

Also note that the `flatMap` method is used to generate a single stream consisting of all the suffixes of all the prefixes. Finally, note that we generate the prefixes and suffixes by mapping a stream of consecutive int values returned by `IntStream.range` and `IntStream.rangeClosed`.

The adapter method has flaws: Not only does the `Stream-to-Iterable` adapter clutter up client code, but it slows down the loop by a factor of 2.3 on my machine.

### Item48: Use caution when making streams parallel

The streams library has no idea how to parallelize this pipeline and the heuristics fail. Parallelizing a pipeline is unlikely to increase its performance if the source is from `Stream.iterate`, or the intermediate operation `limit` is used. Worse, the default parallelization strategy deals with the unpredictability of `limit` by assuming there’s no harm in processing a few extra elements and discarding any unneeded results. So do not parallelize stream pipelines indiscriminately.

As a rule, performance gains from parallelism are best on streams over `ArrayList`,` HashMap`,` HashSet`, and `ConcurrentHashMap` instances; arrays; `int` ranges; and `long` ranges. Another important factor that all of these data structures have in common is that they provide good-to-excellent *locality of reference* when processed sequentially.

Not only can parallelizing a stream lead to poor performance, including liveness failures; it can lead to incorrect results and unpredictable behavior (*safety failures*). It’s important to remember that parallelizing a stream is strictly a performance optimization.

Under the right circumstances, it *is* possible to achieve near-linear speedup in the number of processor cores simply by adding a `parallel` call to a stream pipeline. 

```java
// Prime-counting stream pipeline - parallel version
static long pi(long n) {
  return LongStream.rangeClosed(2, n)
    .parallel()
    .mapToObj(BigInteger::valueOf)
    .filter(i -> i.isProbablePrime(50))
    .count();
}
```

In summary, do not even attempt to parallelize a stream pipeline unless you have good reason to believe that it will preserve the correctness of the computation and increase its speed. The cost of inappropriately parallelizing a stream can be a program failure or performance disaster. 
